BigBrotr - WoTathon Final Submission
Builder: Vincenzo Imperati

Repository: https://github.com/BigBrotr/bigbrotr
Submission branch: hackathon/wotathon-submission
Submission branch URL: https://github.com/BigBrotr/bigbrotr/tree/hackathon/wotathon-submission
Base PR: https://github.com/BigBrotr/bigbrotr/pull/416
Demo deployment profile: deployments/testbrotr
Documentation: https://bigbrotr.github.io/bigbrotr/
Demo video: submitted separately
Working demo: submitted separately


Elevator Pitch

BigBrotr is an open-source Nostr network observatory and Web of Trust data
foundation. It discovers relays across clearnet, Tor, I2P, and Lokinet, checks
relay health, archives WoT-relevant Nostr events, materializes trust facts,
computes NIP-85 rank snapshots, and publishes trusted assertions. The goal is to
make trust computation on Nostr reproducible and decentralized: anyone can run
their own Trust Engine, inspect the raw signals, or consume the derived data
through REST, Nostr, or database access.


Problem

Web of Trust on Nostr needs broad visibility of social and trust signals, but
those signals are spread across hundreds of independent relays. Each relay sees
only part of the graph, may go offline, and may not retain old events forever.
Developers who want accurate trust scores must either build their own archival
and relay-monitoring infrastructure or accept an incomplete local view.

That creates a bottleneck for Nostr clients, DVMs, trust engines, and research
projects: the hard part is not only the ranking algorithm, but also the durable,
queryable, cross-relay data substrate needed to run that algorithm repeatedly.


Solution

BigBrotr turns that distributed relay surface into a modular, self-hostable
pipeline:

1. Seeder and Finder bootstrap and continuously discover relay URLs.
2. Validator promotes live Nostr relays after WebSocket verification.
3. Monitor runs NIP-11 and NIP-66 health checks and publishes relay monitoring
   events.
4. Synchronizer streams signed Nostr events with cursor-based resumption.
5. Refresher maintains current-state tables, analytics facts, and NIP-85 facts.
6. Ranker uses a private DuckDB working store to compute deterministic PageRank
   snapshots and export NIP-85 rank tables back to PostgreSQL.
7. Assertor publishes NIP-85 trusted assertion events from the computed facts
   and ranks.
8. Api exposes read-only paginated REST access.
9. Dvm exposes read-only database queries over NIP-90.

The services are loosely coupled through PostgreSQL rather than through a
central queue or private inter-service API. This keeps each component
replaceable and makes BigBrotr useful both as a full public observatory and as a
self-hosted trust-data backend.


What Is New During WoTathon

A minimal BigBrotr MVP existed before the hackathon. The submitted branch is a
substantial rebuild focused on the WoTathon track and NIP-85. Compared with the
develop branch, PR #416 adds 201 changed files with 37,940 insertions and 7,275
deletions.

The main hackathon work includes:

- a complete NIP-85 pipeline:
  events + relay state -> Refresher -> current/analytics/NIP-85 facts -> Ranker
  -> rank snapshots -> Assertor -> signed trusted assertion events;
- incremental current-state and analytics tables replacing the older
  materialized-view-centric refresh model;
- a typed Refresher service with checkpointable refresh targets;
- a new Ranker service backed by DuckDB for deterministic PageRank snapshots;
- a new Assertor service for NIP-85 trusted assertions;
- a new bigbrotr.nips.nip85 package with models and event-builder helpers;
- NIP-85 assertion support for users, events, addressable events, and NIP-73
  identifiers;
- kind 10040 trusted-provider-list helper support in the NIP/event-builder
  layer;
- per-service Nostr key configuration, including an Assertor signing key and
  ephemeral fallback for development;
- BigBrotr and LilBrotr Docker deployments updated to the 10-service topology;
- dedicated Prometheus metrics, alert rules, and Grafana dashboards for the new
  services;
- expanded unit and integration coverage for SQL refreshes, NIP-85 facts,
  Ranker, Assertor, and the end-to-end pipeline.


NIP-85 And Interoperability

The submitted branch focuses on NIP-85 as an interoperable trust-publication
format.

Implemented assertion surfaces:

- kind 30382: user/pubkey trusted assertions;
- kind 30383: event trusted assertions;
- kind 30384: addressable-event trusted assertions;
- kind 30385: NIP-73 identifier trusted assertions.

The project also includes helper/model/builder support for kind 10040 trusted
provider declarations. BigBrotr's Assertor intentionally does not publish 10040
as part of its own automated provider flow because those events are user/client
authorization declarations; the helper layer is present for clients or tools
that need to generate public or encrypted provider lists.

The submitted Ranker currently implements deterministic PageRank for pubkey
ranking and derives non-user ranks from refreshed engagement facts. The
architecture is designed so additional algorithm namespaces, including
GrapeRank-style approaches, can be added without changing the archival
substrate or the assertion publisher.

BigBrotr also exposes data through:

- REST API endpoints with pagination, sorting, filtering, schema introspection,
  and primary-key lookups;
- a NIP-90 DVM for read-only database queries over Nostr;
- PostgreSQL tables for self-hosters and trust-engine builders who want direct
  access to the facts and rank snapshots.


Why It Matters

BigBrotr is not only a single trust score service. It is infrastructure for many
trust services. Nostr clients, relays, DVMs, researchers, and independent trust
providers can reuse the same open data pipeline instead of rebuilding relay
discovery, monitoring, archival ingestion, deduplication, incremental refreshes,
and publishing logic from scratch.

This advances the WoTathon goal of decentralized and portable reputation:

- trust data is derived from open Nostr events and relay observations;
- the code is open source under the MIT license;
- the deployment is self-hostable with Docker Compose;
- the ranking namespace is explicit through algorithm_id;
- assertions are published back to Nostr as signed NIP-85 events;
- the architecture supports multiple algorithms and multiple trust providers.


Technical Stack

- Python 3.11+
- PostgreSQL 18
- DuckDB for private Ranker working state
- asyncpg, aiohttp, FastAPI, Pydantic v2
- nostr-sdk for Nostr event handling and signing
- Docker Compose, PGBouncer, Prometheus, Alertmanager, Grafana
- strict typing and unit/integration tests


How To Run

Clone the submitted branch and start the TestBrotr deployment:

    git clone -b hackathon/wotathon-submission https://github.com/BigBrotr/bigbrotr.git
    cd bigbrotr/deployments/testbrotr
    cp .env.example .env

Then set the required database passwords. For stable published identities, set
NOSTR_PRIVATE_KEY_ASSERTOR, NOSTR_PRIVATE_KEY_DVM, NOSTR_PRIVATE_KEY_MONITOR,
and NOSTR_PRIVATE_KEY_SYNCHRONIZER. If NOSTR_PRIVATE_KEY_ASSERTOR is omitted,
the Assertor generates an ephemeral key at config creation, which is useful for
development but not for a persistent public provider identity.

Start the stack:

    docker compose --env-file .env up -d --build

The deployment starts PostgreSQL, PGBouncer, all BigBrotr services, Prometheus,
Alertmanager, and Grafana. Local endpoints include:

- REST API: http://localhost:8082
- Grafana: http://localhost:3002
- Prometheus: http://localhost:9092
- Alertmanager: http://localhost:9095


Judging Criteria Fit

Functional readiness: the branch includes the full service pipeline from relay
discovery and event collection through NIP-85 fact refreshes, ranking, and
trusted assertion publishing, with Docker deployment and monitoring.

Depth and innovation: BigBrotr treats trust computation as an observability and
data-foundation problem, not only an algorithm problem. The incremental facts
layer and DuckDB-backed ranker make it practical to recompute trust snapshots
from a durable cross-relay archive.

Interoperability: BigBrotr publishes NIP-85 trusted assertions, exposes data via
REST and NIP-90, includes kind 10040 helper support, and keeps algorithm outputs
namespaced through algorithm_id.

Decentralizing ecosystem impact: clients and trust engines can reuse BigBrotr as
a building block while still running their own provider identity, ranking
configuration, or deployment.

Documentation and openness: the project is MIT licensed, includes a detailed
README, MkDocs documentation, architecture diagrams, Docker Compose deployments,
service configs, Prometheus/Grafana observability, and expanded tests.

Sustainability: BigBrotr can support a public instance, self-hosted deployments,
paid DVM/API access, and specialized trust-provider services while keeping the
core infrastructure open.


Current Status

The submission state is the branch:

    hackathon/wotathon-submission

The larger development PR that the hackathon branch is based on is:

    https://github.com/BigBrotr/bigbrotr/pull/416

The hackathon branch includes the TestBrotr deployment profile used for the demo
and represents the final WoTathon submission state for BigBrotr's NIP-85 trust
pipeline.
